-
So the final thing I want to talk about for the script part is including third party JavaScript plugins
into website. So to do that,
Normally what you would do is, especially if you're using a famous plugin like jQuery you'll find an
NPM. So "npm install jquery"  and then this time we'll use "--save".
And the difference is between "--save" and "--save-dev". --save used when you are installing
plugins that you will use in your website, in your actual website. "--save-dev"
however used when you are installing something that yo'll use during development like
Gulp.
All right? So let's install jQuery. And mistyped install.
Now we installed the jQuery and in our package.json file now you will have it in a different key dependencies
rather than "devDependencies".
So as you know now any NPM package that we install  goes to the node_modules folder.
So you can search here for jquery.
So here it is.
So you can open it and in this directory you'll find your jQuery source.
Right.
So you might think, ok I'mgonna go to the enqueue-assets and duplicate this file.
And then here I'm gonna add "node_modules/jquery/" etc.
Ok?
But it's completely wrong.
You shouldn't ever rely on the node_modules folder to exist in production. node_module folder is only
used during development.
So what we can do is actually we can go to our entry point or bundle. And import whatever libraries we
want here.
So "import "and when we import from node_modules we don't have to you know write the complete path to node_modules.
We just type the library name.
So "jquery".
So let's save that and run "gulp scripts".
And as you can see it's 1.1 MB file now which is big.
And that's because we include the jQuery library inside of it.
So if we go to dist and bundle you'll actually have the jQuery library inside of it.
And the bundle file is the file that we will eventually include in the enqueue scripts, right?
So you don't have to actually include it from the node_modules files, from the node_modules folder.
We include everything we need in just one single file and enqueue this one single file.
Ok. Some plugins however are actually included in WordPress core.
So let's go to the "wp enqueue script" documentation. WordPress documentation. And you will find a table of all included
JavaScript plugins.
So whenever you include a JavaScript plugin to your website make sure first if it's already included
in WordPress core. And if so you can check the table and check the handle here and includ it using "wp_
enqueue_script".
So actually jQuery is an exception here.
We'll not include it through NPM. It is an actual requirement in WordPress and web sites like Theme Forest to
never include your own jQuery version or actually any plugin that is actually included in the WordPress core.
You should however include it using "wp_enqueue_script".
So if we type here "wp_enqueue_script"
and the handle this time will be "jquery". And we won't add any other parameters.
"jquery" is an already existing handle in WordPress.
Let's see in the browser now. Refresh
and view the source.
And let's search for "jquery". And as you can see we are now adding the jQuery version included in wp-includes
folder which is the WordPress core.
So this is the only way we should include plugins like jQuery.
And the reason for that is that, if everyone, every theme developer and plugin developer include their own
version of the jQuery, what end up with a website that contains multiple jQuery versions and that
may cause problems.
So if a theme developer like us used enqueue scripts in jQuery and then maybe a plugin developer used the
same line WordPress will now from the handle, the unique handle will figure out that we should load jQuery only
once. And that's the use of the of the handle.
That's why it should be unique.
So the bottom line is never do something like that.
Like maybe create a new handle and then put a jQuery and link here and load another jQuery version
other than the one included with WordPress. Another way to include jQuery is actually to put it as
a dependency for our scripts.
So in the array dependencies here I can put "query" and let's refresh the source.
And we still have it. WordPress will make sure that any dependencies for any script that we load is loaded
before that script.
So we can use it inside the script.
So let's go now to bundle. And let's comment this line and run "gulp scripts" again.
And this way we should we should have the WordPress jQuery. And to make sure type jQuery in the console.
And if it returns something that means jQuery is loaded. It is a global variable
jQuery.
So what if we want to use like $ in order bundle.
So let's try now and you know create a jQuery event handler with a $ like you are used
to. On the body for example and click and then any function.
And let's try to compile this
and reload it. And "$ is not a function".
If we usejQuery however.
I forgot to compile.
We have no errors.
And if we click on the body we get the alert.
So what if we want to use $.
One way is that you can define a new constant here. "const $ = jQuery"
So now we can use the $ and compile.
And refresh and still working. Another way, if you want to use import statements so you want to "import
$ from 'jquery'".
So this way we'll import the jQuery library into the bundle like we did the first time. And that, and we don't
need that. We don't need to include the jQuery from the node_modules. we need just to find the global jQuery .
object and assign it to $.
So webpack has a way to do that. In the gulpfile
let's add a new option in the webpack.
Let's call "externals:" and use that when you want to add an external library as a dependency.
And by external library I mean library loaded using a SCRIPT tag rather than install using NPM. So I type
library name. And the global variable that you want to import.
So in our case a "jQuery" with a capital Q.
So now this way when we compile our bundle.js we're not actually import the jQuery from the node_modules
but it will rather search for a global variable "jquery" and assign it to the $.
So let's compile.
And we have an error.
Ok, so in the gulpfile.
It's "externals" and not "external".
And let's compile.
As you can see the bundle is still small which means jQuery is not there.
And if we refresh. It's still working and we are using
the $, still using the $.
So let's summarize what we've done.
Whenever you want to include a third party JavaScript library or plugin first go to this page,
wp enqueue script documentation page. And make sure it's not included in WordPress, right?
If it's not included install it using NPM. And then import it in your file, in your bundle file.
Otherwise just use, just find the handle for the plugin, right, which is this row here. And then include it
using the "wp_enqueue_script".
Or maybe as a dependency like we did here. And if you want to use it as a NPM dependency in your bundle
file like so, using the import statement just add in your gulpfile the "externals" and add your external library
So I hope this makes sense to you.
Let's go now to the next task.